# Microsoft Movie Studio Analysis
Author: Silah Rugut

## Project Overview
This Project analyzes 2553 movies from IMDb, The Movie Database and Box Office Mojo produced between year 2000 and 2019.

### Business Problem
Microsoft is considering venturing into the movie industry as all the big companies are already creating original video content. It intends to create a successful movie studio and it's major problem is the lack of knowledge in this field. It wants to understand the current trends in the film industry and make informed decisions on the types of movies to create for maximum success.

To help Microsoft solve the problem I will consider:
  The number of movies being made per genre
  The most profitable movie genres.
  The trend of movie production over the years
  The relationship between production budget and profits
  The relationship between average rating and profitability

### Data Sources

The data used in this analysis is from the below websites:

* [Box Office Mojo](https://www.boxofficemojo.com/)
* [IMDB](https://www.imdb.com/)
* [Rotten Tomatoes](https://www.rottentomatoes.com/)
* [TheMovieDB](https://www.themoviedb.org/)
* [The Numbers](https://www.the-numbers.com/)

The specific files considered for analysis are: 

* imdb.title.basics.csv.gz
* imdb.title.ratings.csv.gz
* tn_movie_budgets.csv.gz

The above files were specifically selected because of the availability of movie titles and genres, average ratings and movie budgets and gross revenue which are important components that will help me in answering the business problem questions

## Data Preparation
To prepare for analysis, I merged the above three csv files into one master dataframe using the movie title as the unique key and conducted inner joins.

After combining the three CSV files, i dropped the columns that i felt would not be important for our data analysis. These are:
 * 'original_title', 'runtime_minutes', 'numvotes after merging the two imbd datasets.
 * id and tconstruct

I converted the production budget, domestic gross and worldwide gross to numeric values and used them to generated the domestic and wordwide profits columns

Thereafter I divided the production budget column and the two profit columns by 1 million to increase readabilty and ease of analysis.

Afterwards, i dropped the columns that were no longer useful going into analysis.


### Data Analysis

Data Analysis took various methods including descriptive analysis, trend analysis and correlation analysis.

From my combined dataframe I selected the worlwide gross profits as my main profits column for analysis since it incorporates both domestic and international profits. That is why I did not use domestic gross profits for any analysis

## Results

The stated business problem presented by Microsoft is establishing their own movie studio to compete within the movie market, and needing to know what kind of movies will be the most successful.

The analysis of movies from the year 2000 to 2018 shows the following:
 * Number of Movies produced have been declining over time.
 * The correlation between production budget and profits have been positive. There was a negative correlation between production budget and profits between the year 2000 and 2007. Since then, there has been a positive correlation
 * The most profitable genres on average are Action, Adventure, Sci-fi. Adventure, Animation, Comedy all averaging more than 20 billion dollars.
 
## Conclusion & Recommendation

This analysis leads to three recommendations of what movies to produce for Microsoft's new Movie studio.

 * To start by producing Action, Adventure, SCi-Fi and Adventure, Animation and Comedy movies to assured sustained profits across the globe. These genres have demonstrated success over 18 years.
 * The profits generated by movie producing companies over the 18 years have been on a steady growth. This means that the movie producing business is a business that is worth the investment
 * The number of movies produced have been declining over time. This means that the movie producing companies have started diversifying to movie streaming sites and therefore Microsoft will have to include a movie streaming website in their budget.

## The Next Steps

Further analysis could yield additional insights that would better inform Microsoft in their decision making:

Analyze streaming data - The dataset used in this analysis was from the tradition theatre released movies and therefore there is need to analyze data on profits and ratings from streaming websites to better inform the investment decision
Movies like Black Panther hit the top charts in the year 2018 as it appealed to a certain demographic. So there is need to study which demographic in terms of gender, race, and language a certain genre appeal to. So Microsoft can tailor its studio to production of movies appealing to diverse groups of people
Analyze the most recent data from the year 2019 to 2023. This can bring alot of insight on the trend of movie production revenue given that there was Covid-19 pandemic that likely influenced production of movies and also the consumer behavior.

